+++
author = "Saharsh Singh"
title = "Gophin’ Off With Linked Lists. Part 1"
slug= "gophin-off-1"
weight = 1
date = "2018-12-18"
description = "In this video, I build a quick and dirty circular doubly linked list to get my bearings in the Go language. Will cover some very fundamental Go concepts that we will build on much more in future videos."
tags = [
    "code",
    "data structures",
    "golang",
    "howto",
    "software",
    "tech",
    "work",
]
categories = [
    "videos",
]
aliases = [
    "/2018/12/18/gophin-off-with-linked-lists-part-1/",
]
+++

I wanted to learn Go. So I learned Go. I was proud of learning Go pretty quickly. So I decided why don’t I share with the world my approach to learning a new programming language. And then this blog was born. So come learn Go with me as I explore the ins and outs of the language under the guise of building and using my very own circular doubly linked list implementation.

<!--more-->

This is the first part of this series. In this video, I build a quick and dirty circular doubly linked list to get my bearings in the Go language. Will cover some very fundamental Go concepts that we will build on much more in future videos.

In the first episode, I start from the basics. I highly encourage everyone to go through the standard Go Tour first, especially since it is the best! It will give you a quick crash course in the fundamentals of the language. This video will pick it up from there.

Here I look at writing a very simple Go application. I build out a very minimal linked list implementation and write a driver application to test that implementation. Along the way, we learn the very basic structure of a Go app, and practice building our own abstractions and using them.

{{< youtube ohi7F1MVarQ >}}

Here’s a link to the setup video referred to in the beginning of the previous video. This is a very skippable part of the series, and that’s why I have put it here as an addendum. Go through it if you want to watch me setup Go and VS Code on my Mac book.

{{< youtube BoO5MOFU7e8 >}}

Check out the code from this video series on Github [here](https://github.com/saharsh-samples/gophinoff). And stay tuned! There’s lots more to come.